=pod

=head1 NAME

dvbtextsubs - extract subtitles stored as teletext-pages in an MPEG-file.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  dvbtextsubs [OPTIONS] pid pageno < recording.ts > subtitles.xml

=head1 DESCRIPTION

DVB broadcasts can include subtitles encoded in the teletext pages sent
together with the video and audio in the MPEG transport stream. The teletext
pages are sent on a separate pid and the subtitles are identified by their
own pagenumber within the teletext stream. dvbtextsubs can extract the
subtitles from within the MPEG transport stream and output it in either an
xml-based format suitable for processing with L<xml2spumux> or in Subviewer
format that can be read by most software video-players. 

dvbtextsubs takes two mandatory parameters. The first parameter is the pid 
for the teletext-stream in the input-file. The second parameter is the
teletext pagenumber where the subtitles can be found. See the section
B<FINDING PID AND PAGENUMBER> below for more information. If no options
are passed to dvbtextsubs, the subtitles will be output in xml-format on 
standard out.

=head2 Supported stream formats

dvbtextsubs expects to receive a stream in MPEG-TS format on standard in. The
stream does not have to contain any PAT or PMT, only the teletext pid is
necessary (and an audio-pid if the -apts option is used).

=head2 Options

The following options can be passed to dvbtextsubs:

=over 4

=item -srt

Output data in Subviewer format.

=item -pts <offset>

Adjust each timestamp for the subtitles by adding <offset> milliseconds.

=item -apts

Ignore the timestamp on the teletext stream and use the timestamp of the
audio-stream for the subtitles instead.

=item -apid <pid>

Use pid <pid> as the audio-pid to synchronize the subtitles to. This option
is only valid together with the B<-apts> option. Normally, dvbtextsubs
should be able to auto-detect the audio-pid.

=item -keeppts

Normally, dvbtextsubs outputs timestamps as an offset to the start of the
MPEG stream. -keeppts tells dvbtextsubs to use the absolute value of
the pts-field (Presentation Time-Stamp) instead.

=back

=head1 FINDING PID AND PAGENUMBER

Information on which pid and pagenumber the subtitles can be found in is
normally stored in the PMT (Program Map Table) inside the MPEG stream. One
way to retrieve this information is to use L<dvbtune -i> to dump the PAT and
PMT to xml-format. A channel with teletext subtitles contains an entry like
this (indentation added for clarity:

  <stream type="6" pid="1244">
    <teletext tag="0x56">
      <teletext_info lang="swe" type="1" page="100"/>
      <teletext_info lang="swe" type="2" page="694"/>
      <teletext_info lang="swe" type="5" page="794"/>
    </teletext>
  </stream>

In this example, the teletext is sent with pid 1244 and the subtitles
are sent on page 694 (type=2).

=head1 EXAMPLES

To extract the teletext subtitles from a recorded TS-stream containing
an audio-pid, a video-pid and the subtitles on pid 1024, page 692, use

dvbtextsubs 1024 692 < recording.ts > subtitles.xml

The generated xml-file is suitable for feeding to L<xml2spumux>

To extract the teletext subtitles from the same file in a format suitable
for displaying with xine, use 

dvbtextsubs -srt 1024 692 < recording.ts > recording.srt

The file recording.srt will contain timestamps that are relative to the
start of the file.

If you want to play the file in mplayer instead, use

dvbtextsubs -keeppts -srt -1024 692 < recording.ts > recording.srt

This time the timestamps will be relative to the Presentation Timestamp in
the MPEG-TS file.

If the subtitles are not properly synchronized with the audio and video, it
may be because the Presentation Timestamp for the teletext stream is
different from the Presentation Timestamp for the audio/video. Try using
the -apts and -apid options described above. They instruct dvbtextsubs to use 
the relative position of the teletext page in the stream as the timestamp 
rather than the PTS for the teletext stream.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xml2spumux>, L<dvbsubs>

=head1 AUTHOR

dvbtextsubs was written by Dave Chapman <dave -at- dchapman /dot/ com>. The
latest version is available from http://www.linuxstb.org/dvbtextsubs/.

This manual page was written by Mattias Holmlund, 
<mattias -at- holmlund /dot/ se>

=cut